Best I can tell, Flex takes this approach to representing NFA states

Intro to Algos, page 241:

We can represent a collection of objects that have the same attributes by using an array for each attribute.
As an example, Figure 10.5 shows how we can implement the linked list of Figure 10.3(a) with three arrays.
The array key holds the values of the keys currently in the dynamic set, and the pointers reside in the arrays next and prev.
For a given array index x, the array entries key[x], next[x], and prev[x]􏰀represent an object in the linked list.
Under this interpretation, a pointer x is simply a common index into the key, next, and prev arrays.

With a multiple array implementation you can implement your own garbage collection (or storage manager) that keeps track
of storage locations in the data structure that are actually being used, and those that are free.

With sets, objects contain a "key" attribute.

Operations:
iterate(S)      <- for hash table, proportional to the number of keys? or the allocated size of the array? hash table doesn't maintain order
member(S, k)
find(S, k)
insert(S, k)
delete(S, k)
equals(S1, S2)  <- ordered set?
union(S1, S2)
intersection(S1, S2)
empty(S)

For DFA/NFA/LR Parser states, the state number is the key
For automata generally, the state number is the key when handling sets of states

Hash Table
h(k) hashes k to h(k)

Collision Resolution:
Chaining, use a linked list at h(k)

Simple Uniform Hashing

Division method of hashing: only use certain numbers for allocated array length (avoid powers of 2)

For instance, a set of 2000 character strings could be slotted into 701 buckets (prime not near the nearest powers of 512, 1024)
So, h(k) = k % 701

Open Addressing, where we compute the sequence of slots that can be occupied
We "probe" for an empty slot
    Linear Probing
    Quadratic Probing
    Double Hashing

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_hashing

Size balanced binary tree?
Red-black tree?

Perfect Hashing?
Compute a perfect hash function at runtime?

Patricia Trees?


